# DifferentialGeneExpressionAnalysis
Analysis of RNA-seq data obtained from human T cells transduced with a mesothelin-targeting CAR with genetic disruption of ZFP36 and mock control. This repository is a project developed on the RNA-seq class intructed by Evelia Coss, available at: https://github.com/EveliaCoss/RNAseq_classFEB2024, and contains the RMarkdown report and the scripts used to process the data obtained from the bioproject: PRJNA983389. 
## Data description 
**Bioproyect:** PRJNA983389

**Species:** Homo sapiens

**Library type:** Paired-end

**Library selection:** Total RNA, cDNA

**Number of transcriptoms:** 4 

**Biological replicates:** 4 biological replicates 

**Sequencing plataform:** Illumina NovaSeq 6000 (Homo sapiens)

**Sample distribution:** 

- *Treatment:* 2 biological replicates, CAR-T cells with genetic disruption of ZFP36 (SRR24910585, SRR24910583 )

- *Control:* 2 biological replicates, CAR-T cells mock control (SRR24910578, SRR24910580)

**Sequencing depth per transcriptome:**

- SRR24910583: ~20 M read

- SRR24910585: ~30 M read

- SRR24910578: ~25 M read

- SRR24910580: ~27 M read

## Abstract
The ZFP36 is an RNA binding protein that regulates the stability of mRNAs involved in T cell inflammatory functions. In this work, we analyzed a bulk RNA-seq dataset to compare knockout (KO) of ZFP36 in CD4 CAR-T cells to unedited mock cells, this to observe if the disruption of ZFP36 could enhance antitumor responses. The programs used in this work are fastqc/multiqc, which helped in analyzing the quality of the fastq files; Trimmomatic, a bioinformatic tool used for removing bad quality sequences; STAR, which is an alignment tool; and finally R, in which we did the differential gene expression. After the analyses, we didn't see a statistically significant difference between the KO and mock cells, which led to the conclusion that the sole disruption of ZFP36 is not sufficient for enhancement of the inflammatory function.

## Work directory guide
The main directory where all of our data and results are located is the following:

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto
```
 
The ```data``` directory is where all the raw data from our project are located:

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/data
```
The ```scripts``` directory is where all the scripts that were used to send as jobs to the LAVIS cluster are stored

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/scripts
```
 
The ```quality1``` directory contains all the fastqc reports generated for each of the fastq files from the raw data. In this case, there are 8 fastqc reports. This directory also contains the multiqc report, as well as another directory called ```multiqc_data``` that has files giving information regarding the mulitqc processing.

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/quality1
```

The ```TRIM_results``` directory contains the trimmed files generated by the tool Trimmomatic. it contains a trimmed and an unpaired file for every fastq file, (16 files).

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/TRIM_results
```

The ```quality2``` directory contains the same analyses as the quality1 directory, however, these quality control reports are done after the trimming was complete. Since we have 16 fastq files generated by the Trimmomatic tool, we will have 16 reports and 16 zip files generated to make the reports (32 files in total). Just like the quality1 directory, there is also a multiqc report and a directory called ```multiqc_data``` with information of the processing.

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/quality2
```
The ```annotation``` directory has the annotation file for the reference genome. An annotation file is used to store and represent genomic information.

```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/annotation
```
```STAR_index``` has the indexing files needed for the alignment. The indexing files are used by the aligner and it is particularly useful for speeding up the process by using less computational power.
```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/STAR_index
```
```STAR_output``` has the alignment file, as well as other log files useful for debugging.
```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/STAR_output
```
The ```results``` directory has the differential gene expression results, which has 2 other directories: ```counts``` has statistics of the mapped and unmapped sequences; ```figures``` has all the images generated by R and the csv and r files.

Finally, there are two files in the general project directory: ```metadata.csv``` is a file used in the differential gene expression results, and ```TruSeq3-PE-2.fa``` is the file that contains the Illumina Adapters. Their paths are the following:
```
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/metadata.csv
/mnt/Guanina/bioinfo24/Equipo3/Proyecto/TruSeq3-PE-2.fa
```
## Results an discussion
Available in the RMarkdown RNA_seq.Rmd
